Chapter: Related Work / Section: Projects (#17)
ysndr/MSc-Thesis: chapter/related-work.md

#### Language Complexity

### Representative LSP Projects

Since the number of implementations of the LSP is continuously growing, this thesis will present a selected set of notable projects.

1. Three highly advanced and complete implementations that are the de-facto standard tooling for their respective language:
   *rust-analyzer* [@rust-analyzer], *ocaml-lsp*/*merlin* [@ocaml-lsp,@merlin] and the *Haskell Language Server* [@hls]
2. Two projects that provide compelling alternatives for existing specialized solutions:
   *Metals* (for Scala) [@metals], *Java LSP* [@java-lsp]
3. Language Servers for small languages in terms of complexity and userbase, highlighting one of the many use cases for the LSP.

>    *rnix-lsp* [@rnix-lsp], *frege-lsp*

Reviewer: Good idea to compare with other "small" languages.

>    *rnix-lsp* [@rnix-lsp], *frege-lsp*

Author: Done

#### LSP as standard tooling

> Today LSP based solutions serve as the go-to-method to implement language analysis tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today LSP-based solutions serve as the go-to method to implement language analysis tools.
```

> Especially emerging languages without existing integration with major IDEs make extensive use of the flexibility and reach provided by the LSP.

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit heavy. Suggestion:

```suggestion
Emerging languages in particular take advantage from the the flexibility and reach of the LSP.
```

Most languages profit greatly from the possibility to leverage existing tooling for the language.
For instance the Haskell language server facilitates a plugin system that allows it to integrate with existing tooling projects [@hls-plugin-search].

> Plugins provide capabilities for linting [@hls-hlint-plugin], formatting [@hls-floskell-plugin,hls-ormolu-plugin] documentation [@hls-haddock-comments-plugin] and other code actions [@hls-tactics-plugin] across multiple compiler versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugins provide capabilities for linting [@hls-hlint-plugin], formatting [@hls-floskell-plugin,hls-ormolu-plugin], documentation [@hls-haddock-comments-plugin] and other code actions [@hls-tactics-plugin] across multiple compiler versions.
```

> While this requires HSL to be compiled with the same compiler version in use by the IDE, it also avoids large scale reimplementations of compiler features in an entirely different language.

Reviewer: > Why this requires HSL to be compiled with the same compiler version in use by the IDE

I'm not sure this is relevant: it's a technical detail, and I imagine you would have the same issue even if you reimplement your own parser and analyzer: if the syntax changes, you can be out of sync between the compiler you are using for building and the parser used by the LSP. Maybe the restriction here is stricter, as here it wouldn't even start instead of just showing possible outdated diagnostics?

Being written in Java, allows the server to make use of other community efforts such as the LSP4J project which provide abstractions over the interaction with LSP clients.
Through the use for such abstractions, servers can focus on the implementation of capabilities only.

#### Language Independence

The LSP is truly language independent.
Many language implementations do not expose the required language interfaces (parsing, AST, Types, etc..), or pose various other impediments such as a closed source, licensing, or the absence of LSP abstractions available for the host language.

An instance of this type is the rnix-lsp[@rnix-git] language server for the nix[@nixos.org] programming language.
Despite the nix language being written in C++ [@nix-repo], its language server builds on a custom parser[@rnix] in Rust.

The work presented by Leimeister in [@cpachecker-lsp] exemplifies how functionality can be provided by entirely external tools as well.
The server can be used to automatically perform software verification in the background using CPAchecker[@cpachecker].

> CPAchecker is a platform for automatic, extensible, software verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CPAchecker is a platform for automatic and extensible software verification.
```

Similar to the work by Leimeister, in [@comprehension-features] Mészáros et al. present a proof of concept leveraging the LSP to integrate (stand-alone) code comprehension tools with the LSP compliant VSCode editor.
Code comprehension tools support the work with complex code bases by "providing various textual information, visualization views and source code metrics on multiple abstraction levels".
Pushing the boundaries of LSP use-cases, code comprehension tools do not only analyze specific source code, but also take into account contextual information.
One of such tools is CodeCompass [@code-compass].
The works of Mészáros yielded a language server that allowed to access the analysis features of CodeCompass in VSCode.
In their paper they specifically describe the generation of source code diagrams.
Commands issued by the client are processed by a CodeCompass plugin which acts as an LSP server and interacts with CodeCompass through internal APIs.

#### Language Servers for Domain Specific Languages

Bünder and Kuchen [@multi-editor-support] highlight the importance of the LSP in the area of Domain Specific Languages (DSL).

> Compared to general purpose languages, DSLs often focus both technical and non-technical users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compared to general purpose languages, DSLs often targets both technical and non-technical users.
```

While DSL creation workbenches like Xtext [@eclipse-xtext], Spoofax [@spoofax] or MPS[@jetpbrains-mps] allow for the implementation and provision of Eclipse or IntelliJ based DSLs, tooling for these languages is usually tied to the underlying platform.
Requiring a specific development platform does not satisfy every user of the language.

> Developers may prefer using different editors, while non-technical users could easily be overwhelmed by a highly technical tool such as Eclipse and likewise prefer a lighter editor or integration into their business application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers have their editor of choice, that they don't easily give up on. Non-technical users could easily be overwhelmed by a complex software like Eclipse. For those non-technical users, a light editor would be more adapted, or even one that is directly integrated into their business application.
```

> The authors of [@multi-editor-support] present how Xtext can be employed to forge DSLs that are relying on the LSP to provide multi-editor support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The authors of [@multi-editor-support] present how Xtext can generate an LSP server for a custom DSL, providing multi-editor support.
```

> Using a generated LSP server allows the integration of DSL language tooling into LSP capable editors.

Reviewer: It sounds redundant with the previous sentence.

Author: Yes agree
```suggestion

```

The authors especially mention the Monaco Editor [@monaco-editor], a reusable HTML component for code editing using web technologies.
It is used in products like VSCode [@vscode], Theia [@theia] and other web accessible code editors.

> Since the Monaco Editor can be configured as an LSP client integrating LSP supported DSLs into web based business applications is now easier than ever before.

Reviewer: There's something wrong with this sentence.
```suggestion
The Monaco Editor supports the LSP as a client (that is, on the editor side). Such LSP-capable web editors make integrating DSLs directly into web applications easier than ever before.
```
